libc/docs/code_style.rst, before:

.. _code_style:

===================
The libc code style
===================

For the large part, the libc project follows the general `coding standards of
the LLVM project <https://llvm.org/docs/CodingStandards.html>`_. The libc
project differs from that standard with respect to the naming style. The
differences are as follows:

#. **Non-const variables** - This includes function arguments, struct and
   class data members, non-const globals and local variables. They all use the
   ``snake_case`` style.
#. **const and constexpr variables** - They use the capitlized
   ``SNAKE_CASE`` irrespective of whether they are local or global.
#. **Function and methods** - They use the ``snake_case`` style like the
   non-const variables.
#. **Internal type names** - These are types which are interal to the libc
   implementation. They use the `CaptilizedCamelCase` style.
#. **Public names** - These are the names as prescribed by the standards and
   will follow the style as prescribed by the standards.

Commit message:

[libc][NFC] Replace "inline" keyword with "LIBC_INLINE".
This is the first of patches doing similar cleanup. A section in the
code style doc has been added explaining where and how LIBC_INLINE is to
be used.

Reviewed By: jeffbailey, lntue

Differential Revision: https://reviews.llvm.org/D142434

libc/docs/code_style.rst, after:

.. _code_style:

===================
The libc code style
===================

Naming style
============

For the large part, the libc project follows the general `coding standards of
the LLVM project <https://llvm.org/docs/CodingStandards.html>`_. The libc
project differs from that standard with respect to the naming style. The
differences are as follows:

#. **Non-const variables** - This includes function arguments, struct and
   class data members, non-const globals and local variables. They all use the
   ``snake_case`` style.
#. **const and constexpr variables** - They use the capitlized
   ``SNAKE_CASE`` irrespective of whether they are local or global.
#. **Function and methods** - They use the ``snake_case`` style like the
   non-const variables.
#. **Internal type names** - These are types which are interal to the libc
   implementation. They use the ``CaptilizedCamelCase`` style.
#. **Public names** - These are the names as prescribed by the standards and
   will follow the style as prescribed by the standards.

Inline functions defined in header files
========================================

When defining functions inline in header files, we follow certain rules:

#. The functions should not be given file-static linkage. There can be class
   static methods defined inline however.
#. Instead of using the ``inline`` keyword, they should be tagged with the
   ``LIBC_INLINE`` macro defined in ``src/__support/common.h``. For example:

   .. code-block:: c++

     LIBC_INLINE ReturnType function_defined_inline(ArgType arg) {
       ...
     }

#. The ``LIBC_INLINE`` tag should also be added to functions which have
   definitions that are implicitly inline. Examples of such functions are
   class methods (static and non-static) defined inline and ``constexpr``
   functions.
