llvm/docs/Reference.rst, before:

Reference
=========

LLVM and API reference documentation.

.. contents::
   :local:

.. toctree::
   :hidden:

   Atomics
   BitCodeFormat
   BlockFrequencyTerminology
   BranchWeightMetadata
   Bugpoint
   CommandGuide/index
   ConvergenceAndUniformity
   Coroutines
   DependenceGraphs/index
   ExceptionHandling
   Extensions
   FaultMaps
   FuzzingLLVM
   GarbageCollection
   GetElementPtr
   GlobalISel/index
   GwpAsan
   HowToSetUpLLVMStyleRTTI
   HowToUseAttributes
   InAlloca
   LangRef
   LibFuzzer
   MarkedUpDisassembly
   MIRLangRef
   OptBisect
   PCSectionsMetadata
   PDB/index
   PointerAuth
   ScudoHardenedAllocator
   MemTagSanitizer
   Security
   SecurityTransparencyReports
   SegmentedStacks
   StackMaps
   SpeculativeLoadHardening
   Statepoints
   SymbolizerMarkupFormat
   SystemLibrary
   TestingGuide
   TransformMetadata
   TypeMetadata
   XRay
   XRayExample
   XRayFDRFormat
   YamlIO

API Reference
-------------

`Doxygen generated documentation <https://llvm.org/doxygen/>`_
  (`classes <https://llvm.org/doxygen/inherits.html>`_)

:doc:`HowToUseAttributes`
  Answers some questions about the new Attributes infrastructure.

LLVM Reference
--------------

======================
Command Line Utilities
======================

:doc:`LLVM Command Guide <CommandGuide/index>`
   A reference manual for the LLVM command line utilities ("man" pages for LLVM
   tools).

:doc:`Bugpoint`
   Automatic bug finder and test-case reducer description and usage
   information.

:doc:`OptBisect`
  A command line option for debugging optimization-induced failures.

:doc:`SymbolizerMarkupFormat`
  A reference for the log symbolizer markup accepted by ``llvm-symbolizer``.

:doc:`The Microsoft PDB File Format <PDB/index>`
  A detailed description of the Microsoft PDB (Program Database) file format.

==================
Garbage Collection
==================

:doc:`GarbageCollection`
   The interfaces source-language compilers should use for compiling GC'd
   programs.

:doc:`Statepoints`
  This describes a set of experimental extensions for garbage
  collection support.

=========
LibFuzzer
=========

:doc:`LibFuzzer`
  A library for writing in-process guided fuzzers.

:doc:`FuzzingLLVM`
  Information on writing and using Fuzzers to find bugs in LLVM.

========
LLVM IR
========

:doc:`LLVM Language Reference Manual <LangRef>`
  Defines the LLVM intermediate representation and the assembly form of the
  different nodes.

:doc:`InAlloca`
  Description of the ``inalloca`` argument attribute.

:doc:`BitCodeFormat`
   This describes the file format and encoding used for LLVM "bc" files.

:doc:`Machine IR (MIR) Format Reference Manual <MIRLangRef>`
   A reference manual for the MIR serialization format, which is used to test
   LLVM's code generation passes.

:doc:`GlobalISel/index`
  This describes the prototype instruction selection replacement, GlobalISel.

=====================
Testing and Debugging
=====================

:doc:`LLVM Testing Infrastructure Guide <TestingGuide>`
   A reference manual for using the LLVM testing infrastructure.

:doc:`TestSuiteGuide`
  Describes how to compile and run the test-suite benchmarks.


:doc:`GwpAsan`
  A sampled heap memory error detection toolkit designed for production use.

====
XRay
====

:doc:`XRay`
  High-level documentation of how to use XRay in LLVM.

:doc:`XRayExample`
  An example of how to debug an application with XRay.

=================
Additional Topics
=================

:doc:`FaultMaps`
  LLVM support for folding control flow into faulting machine instructions.

:doc:`Atomics`
  Information about LLVM's concurrency model.

:doc:`ExceptionHandling`
   This document describes the design and implementation of exception handling
   in LLVM.

:doc:`Extensions`
  LLVM-specific extensions to tools and formats LLVM seeks compatibility with.

:doc:`HowToSetUpLLVMStyleRTTI`
  How to make ``isa<>``, ``dyn_cast<>``, etc. available for clients of your
  class hierarchy.

:doc:`BlockFrequencyTerminology`
   Provides information about terminology used in the ``BlockFrequencyInfo``
   analysis pass.

:doc:`BranchWeightMetadata`
   Provides information about Branch Prediction Information.

:doc:`GetElementPtr`
  Answers to some very frequent questions about LLVM's most frequently
  misunderstood instruction.

:doc:`ScudoHardenedAllocator`
  A library that implements a security-hardened `malloc()`.

:doc:`MemTagSanitizer`
  Security hardening for production code aiming to mitigate memory
  related vulnerabilities. Based on the Armv8.5-A Memory Tagging Extension.

:doc:`Dependence Graphs <DependenceGraphs/index>`
  A description of the design of the various dependence graphs such as
  the DDG (Data Dependence Graph).

:doc:`SpeculativeLoadHardening`
  A description of the Speculative Load Hardening mitigation for Spectre v1.

:doc:`SegmentedStacks`
   This document describes segmented stacks and how they are used in LLVM.

:doc:`MarkedUpDisassembly`
   This document describes the optional rich disassembly output syntax.

:doc:`StackMaps`
  LLVM support for mapping instruction addresses to the location of
  values and allowing code to be patched.

:doc:`Coroutines`
  LLVM support for coroutines.

:doc:`PointerAuth`
  A description of pointer authentication, its LLVM IR representation, and its
  support in the backend.

:doc:`YamlIO`
   A reference guide for using LLVM's YAML I/O library.

:doc:`ConvergenceAndUniformity`
   A description of uniformity analysis in the presence of irreducible
   control flow, and its implementation.

Commit message:

[RFC] Introduce convergence control intrinsics
This is a reboot of the original design and implementation by
Nicolai Haehnle <nicolai.haehnle@amd.com>:
https://reviews.llvm.org/D85603

This change also obsoletes an earlier attempt at restarting the work on
convergence tokens:
https://reviews.llvm.org/D104504

Changes relative to D85603:

 1. Clean up the definition of a "convergent operation", a convergent
    call and convergent function.
 2. Clean up the relationship between dynamic instances, sets of threads and
    convergence tokens.
 3. Redistribute the formal rules into the definitions of the convergence
    intrinsics.
 4. Expand on the semantics of entering a function from outside LLVM,
    and the environment-defined outcome of the entry intrinsic.
 5. Replace the term "cycle" with "closed path". The static rules are defined
    in terms of closed paths, and then a relation is established with cycles.
 6. Specify that if a function contains a controlled convergent operation, then
    all convergent operations in that function must be controlled.
 7. Describe an optional procedure to infer tokens for uncontrolled convergent
    operations.
 8. Introduce controlled maximal convergence-before and controlled m-converged
    property as an update to the original properties in UniformityAnalysis.
 9. Additional constraint that a cycle heart can only occur in the header of a
    reducible cycle (natural loop).

Reviewed By: nhaehnle

Differential Revision: https://reviews.llvm.org/D147116

llvm/docs/Reference.rst, after:

Reference
=========

LLVM and API reference documentation.

.. contents::
   :local:

.. toctree::
   :hidden:

   Atomics
   BitCodeFormat
   BlockFrequencyTerminology
   BranchWeightMetadata
   Bugpoint
   CommandGuide/index
   ConvergenceAndUniformity
   ConvergentOperations
   Coroutines
   DependenceGraphs/index
   ExceptionHandling
   Extensions
   FaultMaps
   FuzzingLLVM
   GarbageCollection
   GetElementPtr
   GlobalISel/index
   GwpAsan
   HowToSetUpLLVMStyleRTTI
   HowToUseAttributes
   InAlloca
   LangRef
   LibFuzzer
   MarkedUpDisassembly
   MIRLangRef
   OptBisect
   PCSectionsMetadata
   PDB/index
   PointerAuth
   ScudoHardenedAllocator
   MemTagSanitizer
   Security
   SecurityTransparencyReports
   SegmentedStacks
   StackMaps
   SpeculativeLoadHardening
   Statepoints
   SymbolizerMarkupFormat
   SystemLibrary
   TestingGuide
   TransformMetadata
   TypeMetadata
   XRay
   XRayExample
   XRayFDRFormat
   YamlIO

API Reference
-------------

`Doxygen generated documentation <https://llvm.org/doxygen/>`_
  (`classes <https://llvm.org/doxygen/inherits.html>`_)

:doc:`HowToUseAttributes`
  Answers some questions about the new Attributes infrastructure.

LLVM Reference
--------------

======================
Command Line Utilities
======================

:doc:`LLVM Command Guide <CommandGuide/index>`
   A reference manual for the LLVM command line utilities ("man" pages for LLVM
   tools).

:doc:`Bugpoint`
   Automatic bug finder and test-case reducer description and usage
   information.

:doc:`OptBisect`
  A command line option for debugging optimization-induced failures.

:doc:`SymbolizerMarkupFormat`
  A reference for the log symbolizer markup accepted by ``llvm-symbolizer``.

:doc:`The Microsoft PDB File Format <PDB/index>`
  A detailed description of the Microsoft PDB (Program Database) file format.

==================
Garbage Collection
==================

:doc:`GarbageCollection`
   The interfaces source-language compilers should use for compiling GC'd
   programs.

:doc:`Statepoints`
  This describes a set of experimental extensions for garbage
  collection support.

=========
LibFuzzer
=========

:doc:`LibFuzzer`
  A library for writing in-process guided fuzzers.

:doc:`FuzzingLLVM`
  Information on writing and using Fuzzers to find bugs in LLVM.

========
LLVM IR
========

:doc:`LLVM Language Reference Manual <LangRef>`
  Defines the LLVM intermediate representation and the assembly form of the
  different nodes.

:doc:`InAlloca`
  Description of the ``inalloca`` argument attribute.

:doc:`BitCodeFormat`
   This describes the file format and encoding used for LLVM "bc" files.

:doc:`Machine IR (MIR) Format Reference Manual <MIRLangRef>`
   A reference manual for the MIR serialization format, which is used to test
   LLVM's code generation passes.

:doc:`GlobalISel/index`
  This describes the prototype instruction selection replacement, GlobalISel.

:doc:`ConvergentOperations`
  Description of ``convergent`` operation semantics and related intrinsics.

=====================
Testing and Debugging
=====================

:doc:`LLVM Testing Infrastructure Guide <TestingGuide>`
   A reference manual for using the LLVM testing infrastructure.

:doc:`TestSuiteGuide`
  Describes how to compile and run the test-suite benchmarks.


:doc:`GwpAsan`
  A sampled heap memory error detection toolkit designed for production use.

====
XRay
====

:doc:`XRay`
  High-level documentation of how to use XRay in LLVM.

:doc:`XRayExample`
  An example of how to debug an application with XRay.

=================
Additional Topics
=================

:doc:`FaultMaps`
  LLVM support for folding control flow into faulting machine instructions.

:doc:`Atomics`
  Information about LLVM's concurrency model.

:doc:`ExceptionHandling`
   This document describes the design and implementation of exception handling
   in LLVM.

:doc:`Extensions`
  LLVM-specific extensions to tools and formats LLVM seeks compatibility with.

:doc:`HowToSetUpLLVMStyleRTTI`
  How to make ``isa<>``, ``dyn_cast<>``, etc. available for clients of your
  class hierarchy.

:doc:`BlockFrequencyTerminology`
   Provides information about terminology used in the ``BlockFrequencyInfo``
   analysis pass.

:doc:`BranchWeightMetadata`
   Provides information about Branch Prediction Information.

:doc:`GetElementPtr`
  Answers to some very frequent questions about LLVM's most frequently
  misunderstood instruction.

:doc:`ScudoHardenedAllocator`
  A library that implements a security-hardened `malloc()`.

:doc:`MemTagSanitizer`
  Security hardening for production code aiming to mitigate memory
  related vulnerabilities. Based on the Armv8.5-A Memory Tagging Extension.

:doc:`Dependence Graphs <DependenceGraphs/index>`
  A description of the design of the various dependence graphs such as
  the DDG (Data Dependence Graph).

:doc:`SpeculativeLoadHardening`
  A description of the Speculative Load Hardening mitigation for Spectre v1.

:doc:`SegmentedStacks`
   This document describes segmented stacks and how they are used in LLVM.

:doc:`MarkedUpDisassembly`
   This document describes the optional rich disassembly output syntax.

:doc:`StackMaps`
  LLVM support for mapping instruction addresses to the location of
  values and allowing code to be patched.

:doc:`Coroutines`
  LLVM support for coroutines.

:doc:`PointerAuth`
  A description of pointer authentication, its LLVM IR representation, and its
  support in the backend.

:doc:`YamlIO`
   A reference guide for using LLVM's YAML I/O library.

:doc:`ConvergenceAndUniformity`
   A description of uniformity analysis in the presence of irreducible
   control flow, and its implementation.
