clang-tools-extra/docs/clang-tidy/checks/misc/definitions-in-headers.rst, before:

.. title:: clang-tidy - misc-definitions-in-headers

misc-definitions-in-headers
===========================

Finds non-extern non-inline function and variable definitions in header files,
which can lead to potential ODR violations in case these headers are included
from multiple translation units.

.. code-block:: c++

   // Foo.h
   int a = 1; // Warning: variable definition.
   extern int d; // OK: extern variable.

   namespace N {
     int e = 2; // Warning: variable definition.
   }

   // Warning: variable definition.
   const char* str = "foo";

   // OK: internal linkage variable definitions are ignored for now.
   // Although these might also cause ODR violations, we can be less certain and
   // should try to keep the false-positive rate down.
   static int b = 1;
   const int c = 1;
   const char* const str2 = "foo";
   constexpr int k = 1;

   // Warning: function definition.
   int g() {
     return 1;
   }

   // OK: inline function definition is allowed to be defined multiple times.
   inline int e() {
     return 1;
   }

   class A {
   public:
     int f1() { return 1; } // OK: implicitly inline member function definition is allowed.
     int f2();

     static int d;
   };

   // Warning: not an inline member function definition.
   int A::f2() { return 1; }

   // OK: class static data member declaration is allowed.
   int A::d = 1;

   // OK: function template is allowed.
   template<typename T>
   T f3() {
     T a = 1;
     return a;
   }

   // Warning: full specialization of a function template is not allowed.
   template <>
   int f3() {
     int a = 1;
     return a;
   }

   template <typename T>
   struct B {
     void f1();
   };

   // OK: member function definition of a class template is allowed.
   template <typename T>
   void B<T>::f1() {}

   class CE {
     constexpr static int i = 5; // OK: inline variable definition.
   };

   inline int i = 5; // OK: inline variable definition.

   constexpr int f10() { return 0; } // OK: constexpr function implies inline.

   // OK: C++14 variable templates are inline.
   template <class T>
   constexpr T pi = T(3.1415926L);

Options
-------

.. option:: HeaderFileExtensions

   A comma-separated list of filename extensions of header files (the filename
   extensions should not include "." prefix). Default is "h,hh,hpp,hxx".
   For header files without an extension, use an empty string (if there are no
   other desired extensions) or leave an empty element in the list. E.g.,
   "h,hh,hpp,hxx," (note the trailing comma).

.. option:: UseHeaderFileExtension

   When `true`, the check will use the file extension to distinguish header
   files. Default is `true`.

Commit message:

[clang-tidy] Introduce HeaderFileExtensions and ImplementationFileExtensions options
Re-introduce the patch that was reverted previously.
In the first attempt, the checks would not be able to
read from the global option, since getLocalOrGlobal
only works with string types. Additional logic is needed
in order to support both use cases in the transition
period. All that logic will be removed when the local
options are fully removed.

We have a number of checks designed to analyze problems
in header files only, for example:

bugprone-suspicious-include
google-build-namespaces
llvm-header-guard
misc-definitions-in-header
...

All these checks duplicate the same logic and options
to determine whether a location is placed in the main
source file or in the header. More checks are coming
up with similar requirements.

Thus, to remove duplication, let's move this option
to the top-level configuration of clang-tidy (since
it's something all checks should share).

Add a deprecation notice for all checks that use the
local option, prompting to update to the global option.

Differential Revision: https://reviews.llvm.org/D142655

clang-tools-extra/docs/clang-tidy/checks/misc/definitions-in-headers.rst, after:

.. title:: clang-tidy - misc-definitions-in-headers

misc-definitions-in-headers
===========================

Finds non-extern non-inline function and variable definitions in header files,
which can lead to potential ODR violations in case these headers are included
from multiple translation units.

.. code-block:: c++

   // Foo.h
   int a = 1; // Warning: variable definition.
   extern int d; // OK: extern variable.

   namespace N {
     int e = 2; // Warning: variable definition.
   }

   // Warning: variable definition.
   const char* str = "foo";

   // OK: internal linkage variable definitions are ignored for now.
   // Although these might also cause ODR violations, we can be less certain and
   // should try to keep the false-positive rate down.
   static int b = 1;
   const int c = 1;
   const char* const str2 = "foo";
   constexpr int k = 1;

   // Warning: function definition.
   int g() {
     return 1;
   }

   // OK: inline function definition is allowed to be defined multiple times.
   inline int e() {
     return 1;
   }

   class A {
   public:
     int f1() { return 1; } // OK: implicitly inline member function definition is allowed.
     int f2();

     static int d;
   };

   // Warning: not an inline member function definition.
   int A::f2() { return 1; }

   // OK: class static data member declaration is allowed.
   int A::d = 1;

   // OK: function template is allowed.
   template<typename T>
   T f3() {
     T a = 1;
     return a;
   }

   // Warning: full specialization of a function template is not allowed.
   template <>
   int f3() {
     int a = 1;
     return a;
   }

   template <typename T>
   struct B {
     void f1();
   };

   // OK: member function definition of a class template is allowed.
   template <typename T>
   void B<T>::f1() {}

   class CE {
     constexpr static int i = 5; // OK: inline variable definition.
   };

   inline int i = 5; // OK: inline variable definition.

   constexpr int f10() { return 0; } // OK: constexpr function implies inline.

   // OK: C++14 variable templates are inline.
   template <class T>
   constexpr T pi = T(3.1415926L);

Options
-------

.. option:: HeaderFileExtensions

   Note: this option is deprecated, it will be removed in :program:`clang-tidy`
   version 19. Please use the global configuration option
   `HeaderFileExtensions`.

   A comma-separated list of filename extensions of header files (the filename
   extensions should not include "." prefix). Default is "h,hh,hpp,hxx".
   For header files without an extension, use an empty string (if there are no
   other desired extensions) or leave an empty element in the list. E.g.,
   "h,hh,hpp,hxx," (note the trailing comma).

.. option:: UseHeaderFileExtension

   Note: this option is deprecated, it will be removed in :program:`clang-tidy`
   version 19. The check will unconditionally use the global option
   `HeaderFileExtensions`.

   When `true`, the check will use the file extension to distinguish header
   files. Default is `true`.
