clang-tools-extra/docs/clang-tidy/checks/misc/use-anonymous-namespace.rst, before:

.. title:: clang-tidy - misc-use-anonymous-namespace

misc-use-anonymous-namespace
============================

Finds instances of ``static`` functions or variables declared at global scope
that could instead be moved into an anonymous namespace.

Anonymous namespaces are the "superior alternative" according to the C++
Standard. ``static`` was proposed for deprecation, but later un-deprecated to
keep C compatibility [1]. ``static`` is an overloaded term with different meanings in
different contexts, so it can create confusion.

The following uses of ``static`` will *not* be diagnosed:

* Functions or variables in header files, since anonymous namespaces in headers
  is considered an antipattern. Allowed header file extensions can be configured
  via the `HeaderFileExtensions` option (see below).
* ``const`` or ``constexpr`` variables, since they already have implicit internal
  linkage in C++.

Examples:

.. code-block:: c++

  // Bad
  static void foo();
  static int x;

  // Good
  namespace {
    void foo();
    int x;
  } // namespace

Options
-------

.. option:: HeaderFileExtensions

   A semicolon-separated list of filename extensions of header files (the filename
   extensions should not include "." prefix). Default is ";h;hh;hpp;hxx".
   For extension-less header files, using an empty string or leaving an
   empty string between ";" if there are other filename extensions.

[1] `Undeprecating static <https://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/cwg_defects.html#1012>`_

Commit message:

[clang-tidy] Introduce HeaderFileExtensions and ImplementationFileExtensions options
We have a number of checks designed to analyze problems
in header files only, for example:

bugprone-suspicious-include
google-build-namespaces
llvm-header-guard
misc-definitions-in-header
...

All these checks duplicate the same logic and options
to determine whether a location is placed in the main
source file or in the header. More checks are coming
up with similar requirements.

Thus, to remove duplication, let's move this option
to the top-level configuration of clang-tidy (since
it's something all checks should share).

Since the checks fetch the option via getLocalOrGlobal,
the behavior is unchanged.

Add a deprecation notice for all checks that use the
local option, prompting to update to the global option.

The functionality for parsing the option will need to
remain in the checks during the transition period.
Once the local options are fully removed, the goal
is to store the parsed options in the ClangTidyContext,
that checks can easily have access to.

Differential Revision: https://reviews.llvm.org/D141000

clang-tools-extra/docs/clang-tidy/checks/misc/use-anonymous-namespace.rst, after:

.. title:: clang-tidy - misc-use-anonymous-namespace

misc-use-anonymous-namespace
============================

Finds instances of ``static`` functions or variables declared at global scope
that could instead be moved into an anonymous namespace.

Anonymous namespaces are the "superior alternative" according to the C++
Standard. ``static`` was proposed for deprecation, but later un-deprecated to
keep C compatibility [1]. ``static`` is an overloaded term with different meanings in
different contexts, so it can create confusion.

The following uses of ``static`` will *not* be diagnosed:

* Functions or variables in header files, since anonymous namespaces in headers
  is considered an antipattern. Allowed header file extensions can be configured
  via the `HeaderFileExtensions` option (see below).
* ``const`` or ``constexpr`` variables, since they already have implicit internal
  linkage in C++.

Examples:

.. code-block:: c++

  // Bad
  static void foo();
  static int x;

  // Good
  namespace {
    void foo();
    int x;
  } // namespace

Options
-------

.. option:: HeaderFileExtensions

   Note: this option is deprecated, it will be removed in :program:`clang-tidy`
   version 18. Please use the global configuration option
   `HeaderFileExtensions`.

   A semicolon-separated list of filename extensions of header files (the filename
   extensions should not include "." prefix). Default is ";h;hh;hpp;hxx".
   For extension-less header files, using an empty string or leaving an
   empty string between ";" if there are other filename extensions.

[1] `Undeprecating static <https://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/cwg_defects.html#1012>`_
